# FinOps++ Framework Assessment

A FinOps Assessment perspective as a NIST CSF Community Profile

As organizations move their FinOps practices to shift-left, more of the FinOps optimization and maintenance tasks get pushed to the edge where the Engineers are. In this case, FinOps teams need to move their focus towards supporting the Inform and Operate phases of the FinOps lifecycle. Through building more formal FinOps Policies and Governance standards, FinOps teams can accelerate their iteration through the lifecycle phases to increase their practice maturity for the long run. Pulling inspiration from the Intersecting Discipline of Security, FinOps teams can solidify their position as a trusted partner to the business.

This assessment is an expansion of the existing FinOps Framework Assessment as of 7/3/25. By combining FinOps capabilities with controls found in the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, FinOps practitioners can provide a structured and proven foundation for strengthening governance for cost accountability. Additionally, treating financial risk with the same rigor as cybersecurity empowers FinOps teams to better define their policies, processes, and enforecement of best practices for the organization. 

# CLI Tool

To aid with formatting, transforming, and using the yaml specification, we built the `finopspp` CLI tool. This is a Python based tool that works for `Python >= 3.13`. Currently to use it, you have to build it from source from this repository. To do this, it is recommended that you start off by creating a virtual environment (venv) as is discussed in https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html. 

Once your venv is setup, [activate it](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html#how-venvs-work) and run `python -m pip install -e .` from the same directory as this README. This command will pull in all required dependencies into the venv and then installs the script for you to use in your venv. It will also do this in what is called "[editable](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/#cmdoption-e)" mode. Which will allow you to change packages and files (including yaml specifications) used by `finopspp`, and to directly see those changes reflected in the invocation of the tool. Be careful when doing this, so as not to break the core functionality needed to generate the assessment.

## Common commands

The most useful commands to use with `finopspp` will be related to generate some aspect of the framework. Either markdown documentation or Excel files.

### Framework Markdown

These markdown files are designed to give a one-stop shop for getting an overview, in tabular format, of how a framework (generated from a profile) is logically grouped together. To generate the markdown for the framework overview. First make sure to include a new profile under `[specifications/profiles](/specifications/profiles/) or use one of the existing ones. 

> **_NOTE_**: If you are using a new profile, make sure to select an ID, title, and serialization number for file name that has not already been used.

> **_NOTE_**: Serialization numbers for the file should be the ID with enough `0`s before it to pad out the length of the file name to 3 digits.

Then run the follow

```{sh}
finopspp generate framework --profile="<desired-profile-name>"
```

you can run `finopspp generate framework --help` to see the list of profile options. The files generated by this command can be found in [assessments/frameworks](/assessments/frameworks/). Simple search in this directory for `<desired-profile-name>.md`

### Specification Markdown

These files are designed to be generally more human readable and easier to navigate than the yaml specifications. The four specification types supported currently by `finopspp` are `profiles`, `domains`, `capabilities`, and `actions` and can be found in subdirectories of the same names under 

- [assessments/profiles](/assessments/profiles/)
- [assessments/domains](/assessments/domains/)
- [assessments/capabilities](/assessments/capabilities/)
- [assessments/actions](/assessments/actions/)

> **_NOTE_**: `profiles` markdown files are generated and offered on an as-best-as-possible bases. This is because of the customization allowed for these type. Generally it is recommended to use the Framework markdown to get an overview of the profiles. But we include them for the sake of compilation.

To generate the files in these folder fresh from the yaml files, you can call the following command

```{sh}
finopspp generate specifications --specification-type=<desired-spec-type>
```

## Developing the tool

If you use VSCode, or would like to, you can follow the tutorial from https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial to get started with setting up this python project environment. It is also recommended to read through https://realpython.com/python-pyproject-toml/ to get an overview of `pyproject.toml` based python projects. And to get a feel for the setup of this project in [pyproject.toml](/pyproject.toml) used for `finopspp`.


